# Capstone-Project
Capstone project involving scripting, training, and testing the CHoiCE Data Set against archival texts 

The code used was based off a project from PyLessons who accomplished the same except using the IAM Dataset. The IAM dataset is a large dataset with 115,320 isolated and labeled words from 657 writers. The CHoiCe database specializes in cursive writing, but instead of words has over 3000 labeled letters. I adjusted the code to fit my goals of training the CHoiCE dataset to read archival texts. In order to use the code, I used an Anaconda environment where I used the packages mltu 1.2.5, Python 3.10.13, and Keras 2.10.0. Using any later versions of Python, Keras or mltu will result in the code being uncompatible. 

In order to run the train.py file, a data set with a formatted script file must be inputted to train a model for your appropriate data set. The formatted script file for the IAM Dataset is listed as words.txt and the formatted script file for the CHoiCE dataset is listed as letters.txt. Both scrippted files must follow the written format to extract information from each image file in the dataset. Once a model has been trained, you can use the InferenceModel.py to load your trained model and test  against the training data, or a set of images of your choosing. If the loaded images are compatible, the model will predict your labeled word and prove its accuracy alongside the prediction. The testing data must be a .csv file or else it will be incompatble. I have attached some testing data and training data to test both models for demo purposes. I have also attacched the .csv files that are necessary for loading the testing and training data.

Due to the nature of the CHoiCE data set only consisting of letters, the model will only be able to predict single letters which is a major downside of the model. Also, due to the data set being significantly smaller compared to the IAM Dataset, the accuracy of the model is lower than the IAM Dataset which is dislpayed in the tensorboard function I which you can access in the InferenceModel.py file . However, in application, the CHoiCE data set is much more accurate in reading cursive letters compared to the IAM Dataset, but only being able to read letters is a major hinderance for the model. 

While both models have the capacity to transcribe archival documents, they did so with low accuracy which highlights the need for a larger dataset specialized in this styl of writing to correctly transcribe these documents. My success criteria for transcription was 90% accuracy for my models, but both models failed to reach this threshold. This criteria was set from my contact at the Harvard Archives which highlighted that published documents of these styles must be mostly transcibed. Failing to reach these accuracy rates demonstrates that the datasets used are not as expansive or diverse to be able to read these specific types of handwriting. This could also mean that I might need to refine the train.py file to help achieve this accuracy. 

In conclusion, while the adaptation of the code from PyLessons to work with the CHoiCE dataset represents a tailored apprach to training models for Object Character Recognition (OCR), the reults underscore several challengers inherent in archival document transcription. While successful in training the models, both models failed to meet the reccommended 90% accuracy threshold. This shortfall displays the need for more comprehensive datasets that emcompess a broader range of handwriting styles, particularly those found in archival documents. In order to improve this project in the future, it is crucual to refine training algorithms and expand datasets to reach this accuracy threshold. These effrots will not only enhance the model's performance but also ensure that it can effectively handle the diverse charactersitics and writing styles of historical texts. 

Special thanks to skyatmoon for the CHoiCE dataset which can be found here: https://github.com/skyatmoon/CHoiCe-Dataset
Special thanks to PyLessons for the code shared to help accomplish this project which can be found here. It was an excellent starting point for my research for this topic: https://pylessons.com/handwriting-recognition-pytorch
